
Subject:
case-control / retrospective sampling
From:
Felix Bildhauer <felix.bildhauer@fu-berlin.de>
Date:
31.05.19, 22:15
To:
Roland Schäfer <roland.schaefer@fu-berlin.de>

R.,

> > PS: Bitte die Statistiksachen bei Gel. schicken.

Also,

McCullagh & Nelder (1989, 111--114) schreiben:

"One important property of the logistic function not shared by the other
link functions is that differences on the logistic scale can be
estimated regardless of whether the data are sampled prospectively or
retrospectively. [...] In other words, although the data have been
sampled retrospectively, the logistic model (4.10) continues to apply
with the same coefficients β but a different intercept. It follows
therefore, that the logistic models described here in the context of
prospective studies can be applied to retrospective studies provided
that the intercept is treated as a nuisance parameter. [...] No such
simple inversion exists for probit or complementary log-log models."

Auch bei Agresti (2013, 168--169).

Eine weitere Referenz, die dauernd in dem Zusammehang genannt wird, ist
das Buch von Hosmer & Lemeshow (1982), da habe ich aber nicht reingeguckt.

In Nagelkerke et al. (2005) drehen sie das ganze rum und benutzen es als
Test (auf Modellfehlspezifikation). Das war das Paper, das mich
überhaupt erst auf die Spur gebracht hat.

Anderson (1972), Mantel (1973), Farewell (1979) und Prentice & Pike
(1979) haben die mathematischen Herleitungen. Ich konnte die nicht ohne
Weiteres komplett lesen/verstehen.

Greenland (1981) (ja der Greenland) versucht, trotz allem was über
risk/incidence/base rate zu sagen.

King & Zeng (2002) versuchen, irgendwie Bayesisch die unbekannte base
rate (u.a.) in case-control Studien zu bestimmen.

---

Bei den Pseudo-R^2 ist es die Fußnote in Cragg & Uhler (1970) auf Seite
400. Nagelkerke (1991) ist *das* Paper zum Pseudo-R^2.

---

Die ganze Literatur sollte in meinem (mit dir irgendwann einmal
geteilten) "stats"-Order in der Winchesterwolke sein.


Gr.,
F.


##############
Case-control
##############


@book{McCullaghNelder1989,
	Address = {London and New York},
	Author = {McCullagh, P. and Nelder, J.A. },
	Edition = {2nd},
	Publisher = {Chapman \& Hall},
	Series = {Monographs on Statistics and Applied Probability},
	Title = {Generalized Linear Models},
	Volume = {37},
	Year = {1989}}


@book{Agresti2013,
	Address = {Hoboken},
	Author = {Alan Agresti},
	Edition = {3rd},
	Publisher = {Wiley},
	Title = {Categorical Data Analysis},
	Year = {2013}}


@article{Anderson1972,
	Author = {J. A. Anderson},
	Journal = {Biometrika},
	Number = {1},
	Pages = {19--35},
	Title = {Separate Sample Logistic Discrimination},
	Volume = {59},
	Year = {1972}}


@article{Mantel1973,
	Author = {Nathan Mantel},
	Journal = {Biometrics},
	Number = {3},
	Pages = {479--486},
	Title = {Synthetic Retrospective Studies and Related Topics},
	Volume = {29},
	Year = {1973}}

@article{Farewell1979,
	Author = {V. T. Farewell},
	Journal = {Biometrika},
	Number = {1},
	Pages = {27--32},
	Title = {Some Results on the Estimation of Logistic Models Based on
Retrospective Data},
	Volume = {66},
	Year = {1979}}


@article{PrenticePike1979,
	Author = {R. L. Prentice and R. Pyke},
	Journal = {Biometrika},
	Number = {3},
	Pages = {403--411},
	Title = {Logistic Disease Incidence Models and Case-Control Studies},
	Volume = {66},
	Year = {1979}}


@article{Greenland1981,
	Author = {Sander Greenland},
	Journal = {Journal of Chronic Diseases},
	Number = {9},
	Pages = {445--453},
	Title = {Multivariate estimation of exposure-specific incidence from
case-control studies},
	Volume = {34},
	Year = {1981}}


@article{Nagelkerke-ea1995,
	Author = {Nagelkerke, Nico J. D. and Moses, Stephen and Plummer,
Francis A. and Brunham, Robert C. and Fish, David},
	Journal = {Statistics in Medicine},
	Number = {8},
	Pages = {769-775},
	Title = {Logistic regression in case-control studies: The effect of
using independent as dependent variables},
	Volume = {14},
	Year = {1995}}



@article{Nagelkerke-ea2005,
	Author = {Nico Nagelkerke and Jeroen Smits and  Saskia le Cessie and
Hans {van Houwelingen}},
	Journal = {Statistics in Medicine},
	Pages = {121--130},
	Title = {Testing goodness-of-fit of the logistic regression model in
case-control studies using sample reweighting},
	Volume = {24},
	Year = {2005}}



@article{KingZeng2002,
	Author = {Gary King and Langche Zeng},
	Journal = {Statistics in Medicine},
	Pages = {1409--1427},
	Title = {Estimating risk and rate levels, ratios and differences in
case-control studies},
	Volume = {21},
	Year = {2002}}



##############
Pseudo R^2
##############


@article{CraggUhler1970,
	Author = {John G. Cragg and Russell S. Uhler},
	Journal = {The Canadian Journal of Economics / Revue canadienne
d'Economique},
	Number = {3},
	Pages = {386--406},
	Title = {The Demand for Automobiles},
	Volume = {3},
	Year = {1970}}


@article{Nagelkerke1991,
	Author = {Nicolaas Jan Dirk Nagelkerke},
	Journal = {Biometrika},
	Number = {3},
	Pages = {691--692},
	Title = {A Note on a General Definition of the Coefficient of
Determination},
	Volume = {78},
	Year = {1991}}


@book{Long1997,
	Address = {Thousand Oaks},
	Author = {J. Scott Long},
	Date-Added = {2016-10-14 23:38:59 +0000},
	Date-Modified = {2016-10-14 23:38:59 +0000},
	Publisher = {Sage},
	Title = {Regression models for categorical and limited dependent
variables},
	Year = {1997}}


-- PGP public key: https://felixbildhauer.de/6928C71D.asc

